Malignant individuals and groups
use various methods
to try and force their targets into submission.
Each method attempts to induce its own distinctive psychological deterrent.
Some try to arouse shame.
Others try to instil a sense of helplessness
and dependence.
Others are designed to create intense confusion.
But the aim is always the same:
to train targets to doubt their own judgement
and stop them thinking for themselves.
Manipulators can then gradually
impose their rules —
rules they can change any time they like
which the target will come to accept without question.
Manipulators can also isolate the target
away from the people who could help them escape.
Targets are taught to despise or even fear these potential sources of support
leaving them truly cut off.
In healthy families, as they develop
infants learn to take progressively larger steps.
They risk longer unaccompanied
explorations of their world
where they encounter some nice things
and some not-so-nice things.
Secure in the knowledge they can return to safety if they feel overwhelmed
they learn to cope with the bad
and enjoy the good.
Their self-reliance increases and their world expands.
Targets of manipulative groups experience
this developmental process in reverse.
They learn to take smaller steps.
They’re discouraged from engaging with the
outside world
which is portrayed as hostile and dangerous.
They’re taught that good only exists within the group.
Their self-reliance decreases and their world shrinks.
Piece by piece, they surrender their autonomy
and succumb to increasing supervision.
When faced with dilemmas, they learn
not to trust their own reasoning
but to seek advice, direction and permission from the group.
They’ll be instructed to do things
that arouse great anxiety and distress,
even heartbreak
like demonising good people
and shunning loved ones who disagree with the group.
They’ll be told they need to be ‘brave’
and not give in to these misguided emotions.
The group is their real family.
But their emotions aren’t misguided.
The pain they feel is evidence of their humanity
— their abiding sense of fairness,
compassion and justice.
But these qualities are antagonistic to groups
who seek one thing from their targets: compliance.
And targets will be repeatedly forced to choose
between being loyal to the group
and being true to their humanity.
That choice is perhaps never more stark
than when a target becomes aware
that a child from the group
has made an allegation of sexual abuse
against another member.
Is the target’s first thought for the child’s welfare
or the group’s image?
Their answer will provide a gauge of their humanity.
I want to look at a historical case and a current ongoing case
of manipulative groups that’ve tried to conceal abuse.
And I want to celebrate the genuinely brave individuals
who’ve worked to expose them.
In 1968, in California,
Christian minister David Berg
founded the group ‘Teens for Christ’.
It would later become known as:
‘The Children of God’, ‘The Family’
‘The Family of Love’
and finally its current name:
‘The Family International’.
Presented himself as fatherly prophet
Berg predicted the world would end in 1993
and pressed followers into full-time evangelising
to claim as many souls as possible.
Children were frequently sent
to restaurants and businesses
to sing songs and share their faith.
Followers lived in communes called colonies
and life in the group was strictly regimented
with rules on everything from hairstyles to drink consumption to toilet paper.
Anyone who questioned Berg’s ideas was severely reprimanded.
Berg, who called himself ‘Mo’ —short for Moses —
was a reclusive figure.
Assisted by his wife Karen Zerby
who declared herself a queen
and renamed herself ‘Mama Maria’
Berg communicated his ideas, his commandments
his dreams and professed revelations
to the group
through sensationally headlined letters called ‘Mo letters’.
These included frequent tirades against people
in the outside world, labelled ‘Systemites’.
Most strikingly, the Mo letters were saturated
with descriptions and illustrations of sex
including depictions of Berg being seduced by children.
History’s shown that self-styled divine prophets
create gods in their own images.
David Berg’s doctrines reflected
his own sexual compulsions.
He distilled Christian scripture down to one rule
called the ‘Law of Love’.
As long as it was done in love
Berg claimed it kept their god’s law of love.
Berg used this doctrine to endorse sex
with virtually anyone
as long as it was done in love
including children and relatives.
He called it ‘sharing’ and only
male same-sex partners were forbidden.
Berg encouraged his followers to send him
sexually explicit home movies.
He especially enjoyed videos of erotic dancing.
In one film from Family members in Greece
20 adults and children performed stripteases
to the strains of Richard Clayderman and Mantovani.
Berg also used the videos to handpick child brides.
Amy Bril, who escaped the group
after her father’s suicide
said she was transported to Berg’s
secret residence and married to him at 13
following her performance
in a striptease video.
In the early 1970s, Berg introduced
religious prostitution
quaintly re-branded ‘Flirty Fishing’
—or ‘FFing’.
He asked female members
if they were willing to be nailed
like the Biblical character Jesus
was nailed to a cross
and sent them out to seduce strangers.
In a Mo letter called ‘The 7 F’s of FFing’
he outlined the various ways these strangers
— called ‘Fish’ — could serve the group.
Some would simplyfund the group with sex payments.
Some would become members.
Some in positions of power could even
provide political backing.
In 1975, after Flirty Fishing a local hotel
worker in Tenerife
Berg’s wife Karen Zerby gave birth to David
Moses Zerby, nicknamed Davidito
who Berg treated as his own son and successor.
The couple documented every aspect of the boy’s life
in a book called ‘The story of Davidito’
which Berg presented as a guide
to raising children.
It became a record of
Davidito’s sexual abuse.
Photos of him in his first three years were
captioned with sexual insinuations
suggesting he had a ‘come hither’ look
and enjoyed threesomes.
A chapter called ‘My Little Fish’ showed him
in multiple sexual acts with one of his nannies.
Following Berg’s doctrines and personal example
abuse was widespread within the group.
Verity Carter, who escaped the group at 15,
described it as ‘hell on earth’.
She reported being abused
from the age of four
by various members, including her father was
who convicted.
Author Natacha Tormey, who escaped at 18
also reported being abused from the age of four
by a man called ‘Uncle Clay’
who persisted even when she was down with a fever.
Peter Froumanreported being abused at 11
by a woman of 28
in front of an approving audience that included his mother.
Because sex between adults and minors
had been normalised
it didn’t seem like abuse.
Sylvia Padilla raised seven children
in the group.
Aside from being pressured into sex with other
members and into prostitution
Sylvia eventually discovered the abuse her
children suffered.
Of her first four children, the two youngest,
Victoria and Miriam
reported being pushed to perform stripteases
in their early teens.
The second oldest, Debbie, was molested
between the ages of 9 and 12
by a member living at their home.
On discovering the abuse, Sylvia threw him out.
But when Debbie was 15,
group leaders began molesting her.
Debbie had been prepared to fend off ordinary members
but she said rejecting leaders felt impossible.
Sylvia’s oldest child, Shuly, didn’t make
it out of the group alive.
At 15, she contracted lupus
an autoimmune disease that turns the body against itself.
Members were encouraged to shun worldly medicine
but for a while Shuly accepted drug treatment.
To distract herself from the pain,
she liked to read books.
But books were forbidden.
Shuly decided to write to Berg himself
to ask if it would be okay for her to read.
In his public reply, Berg insinuated that
the lupus was her punishment for reading.
Eventually, feeling guilty and inadequate
Shuly discontinued her medication.
She died aged 17.
Berg later published a dream in which he met Shuly in heaven
and was seduced by her.
A graphic depiction of their
sexual encounter followed.
Shuly’s grieving siblings were enraged.
From the start, David Berg presented himself
as a revolutionary
here to turn the world upside-down,
emulating Jesus.
From this swaggering self-assessment
we should expect to see an individual boldly
asserting himself into the public arena
fearlessly preaching his message to the masses
openly challenging the authorities of his time
with unwavering conviction.
But Berg was a make-believe revolutionary.
He kept his doctrines secret within the safe
confines of his devoted group
taking great efforts to hide them from outsiders.
This included multiple ‘purges’
in which the group was told to edit or destroy
sexually explicit publications, like the Davidito book.
Members were threatened with
excommunication for non-compliance.
Some letters were pre-emptively
labelled ‘BAR Pub’
meaning burn after reading publication.
Group representatives denied
all accusations of abuse.
When questioned about
the Padilla family’s allegations
a group spokesman called ‘Solomon’ rejected
them outright with four key denials.
Denial number one: he said no one told members
to ‘share’ themselves sexually.
But in a Mo letter called ‘One Wife’,
couples who didn’t share
were accused of failing to put
the larger family first.
Berg warned that their god would only take
the willing and abandon the rest.
Reluctant members were told they must have
a demon inside them
or that they didn’t love their god enough.
Escapees have reported having to follow sharing schedules
created by leaders to ensure everyone shared
with everyone else.
The fact is members were routinely told
to have sex with other members
and coerced if they resisted.
Denial number two: ‘Solomon’ claimed ‘Flirty
Fishing’ was never synonymous with sex.
He said it could simply mean
going to a bar or a park
and talking to someone about Jesus.
In fact, Flirty Fishing was synonymous with prostitution
as illustrated by Berg’s synonyms for Flirty Fishers:
‘God’s Whores’ and ‘Hookers for Jesus’.
Denial number three: ‘Solomon’ said the group
hadn’t produced pornography
and claimed no knowledge
of any videos dedicated to Berg.
In a 1995 court hearing, the group made the
same denial under divine oath.
After tapes were produced in evidence
they changed their story
claiming the videos were just intended
to instil a positive body image in its members.
But the intention was undeniably pornographic.
Pornography is defined as forms of media designed
to be sexually arousing.
In a Mo letter called Glorify God in the Dance
Berg openly stated that he used the videos
as a ‘lively accompaniment’ to sex.
Over 30 highly repetitive pages, he then gave
detailed instructions
regarding what turned him on
restating ad nauseam that dancers should be naked
except for a see-through scarf or veil
and should dance in a provocative
tantalising teasing way
because stolen peeks and secret looks
were more exciting.
Finally, we have denial number four:
‘Solomon’ said the group didn’t believe in
sex between minors and adults.
In 1989, Berg released an official public
denial to that effect
claiming sex with minors was absolutely forbidden.
In the body of his statement
Berg cited the much-criticised ‘My Little Fish’
chapter in the Davidito book
that showed the boy’s nanny molesting him.
Berg attempted to scapegoat her, claiming
the chapter reflected
her own personal experience and opinions
and that such intimate relationships
between minors and adults
had never been encouraged or condoned in the group.
But Berg’s official encouragement, condonation
and participation was prolific and undeniable
from his repeated justifications in group publications
to the child brides he molested,
including his own granddaughter Merry Berg
a brave and inspiring individual
who endured unthinkable abuse
and became an outspoken critic of the group.
Another branch of child molestation
in the group
was revealed by Anneke and Ron Schieberl
who’ve helped over 50 individuals escape
and acclimatise to the outside world.
They reported that they quit the group
when leaders told Ron
they wanted him to have sex with
a 12 year old to humble her arrogance.
Ron refused and threatened action
against anyone else who complied.
Following Berg’s public denouncement of child sex
privately, the approval continued.
A secret letter to the group from Karen Zerby
revealed their defiant attitude.
In it, she stated fondling children was not
wrong and did not constitute abuse.
And she anticipated a time when the group
would take a stand
and be truthful about the subject.
Some years later, she would see her son
the boy called Davidito
take a stand of his own.
Going by the new name of Ricky Rodriguez
he tracked down and killed one of his abusers
a nanny called Angela Smith
then committed suicide.
For David Berg and his representatives,
the lies flowed freely
even under divine oath.
Many high-control ideological groups
teachtheir members
that it’s fine to employ deception
in certain circumstances.
Deception can even become an official policy
with its own special name.
In Berg’s group, it was called
‘deceivers yet true’.
Rules were laid out about what kinds of deception
were acceptable.
Deceiving other Family members
was strictly forbidden
as was deceiving for selfish motives like
avoiding punishment for wrongdoings.
But non-members, who were considered
to be serving the Devil
were said to have no right to the truth.
As is repeatedly observed
in high-control groups
the leadership failed to follow its own rules.
Berg had no problem lying to avoid punishment
and was happy to throw other group members
under the bus
to evade prosecution by authorities.
And in her book
‘Born into the Children of God’
Natacha Tormey revealed a twisted way in which
children were trained
to break the rule of always telling the truth
to Family members.
When she was four, some adult members came
to interview the children separately
asking if anyone had touched them
in a bad way.
Although Natacha had been abused
by a man called ‘Clay’
her instincts prompted her to lie
and say no.
The next morning it was revealed
that the interviews had been a test
of the children’s loyalty to the group.
A girl called Samantha who reported
being abused
was then publicly forced to eat soap then
wear a cardboard sign saying:
‘I am on silence restriction for telling lies.
Please do not speak to me.’
The message to the children was clear:
Don’t tell anyone you were abused.
The most effective way to conceal child abuse
is to ensure the children never make any allegations
— not even to those they’re taught to trust.
When an allegation is made,
other cover-up tactics are required.
Cover-ups can employ a huge range of strategies,
often in combination.
Sometimes allegations can be buried before they become public.
Accusers can be bribed and/or threatened
— a method employed by the Catholic Church
to cover up child molestation by its clergy.
Sometimes damning evidence
can be altered or destroyed
as Berg’s group tried to do.
Once an allegation’s been made public,
other strategies come into play
including various forms of denial.
The accused can simply lie
and deny the allegation flat out.
They can deny knowledge or recall of the offence.
They can deny that the offence comes
within their sphere of responsibility.
Or that the offence was as serious or far-reaching
as their accusers allege.
Another strategy is evasion.
The accused might try to avoid being questioned
—wriggling out of court attendance
by claiming illness or bereavement
or even becoming a fugitive as Berg
did to elude authorities.
They might falsely claim some duty of secrecy
which prevents them sharing damning material.
In some groups new members
are given different names.
This happened with Natacha Tormey’s
abuser ‘Clay’
who’d been rebaptised to reflect Berg’s idea
that members should be mouldable
like clay on a potter’s wheel.
Blurring identities can help abusers evade justice.
Some defendants choose to go on the offensive
with counter-accusations.
Attacking their accuser’s character and motives.
Claiming their rights are being violated.
Claiming unfair prejudice or persecution.
Maybe the most slippery strategies are the
ones involving misdirection
— otherwise known as smoke and mirrors —
which direct our attention to the wrong place
with misleading and irrelevant information.
Angus asks Geoffrey: ‘Does your church
accept corporal punishment for children?’
Geoffrey replies: ‘Our church expects parents
to discipline and raise their children.’
This is misdirection, completely bypassing
the central question of corporal punishment
by answering an unasked question
of Geoffrey’s own invention.
Meaningless phrases can be used
to give a parody of answering
while saying nothing.
Zara asks Jag: ‘Does your group have any
female leaders?’
The truth is his group doesn’t accept
female leaders.
To try and cover up that truth, he replies:
‘Women are crucial.’
This statement is meaningless. It doesn’t
specify how women are crucial.
But he hopes this deflection will sound
affirmative enough
to stop the awkward questions.
Later, if the truth comes out, he can
truthfully say he didn’t lie.
What he can’t truthfully say
is he didn’t intend to deceive.
Defendants can misdirect by using misleading, unrepresentative examples.
Children of God’s spokesman ‘Solomon’ did this
when he downplayed Flirty Fishing
as a conversation about Jesus in a park.
And, like Berg did with Davidito’s nanny
scapegoats can be offered up to direct
attention away from the guilty.
Even if the guilty party’s forced to admit
to some wrongdoing
the cover-up can continue.
To get the authorities off their backs
abusive groups will sometimes fake interest
in reformation.
They’ll promise to ‘consider the recommendations’
of official judicial panels
and undertake to introduce new safeguards.
But it’s just word games.
There’s no intention to change —and
the abuse will go on.
A number of these tactics
have been repeatedly used
by senior Jehovah’s Witnesses
to try and cover up
hundreds of cases of child molestation
within their organisation
and the doctrines that’ve helped
to perpetuate that abuse.
Denial is nothing new to the leaders of the
separatist Christian group
Jehovah’s Witnesses, whose religious symbol
is a watchtower.
Any religious group in the habit of predicting
the end of the world
inevitably become practiced at cover-up techniques
when their prophecies fail —as they invariably do.
For The Children of God, armageddon
was predicted to arrive in 1993.
For Jehovah’s Witnesses,
numerous termination dates
spanning over a century have come and gone
— including the year 1975.
Like David Berg, the Jehovah’s Witness leadership
—known as the Governing Body —
produces a range of publications to convey their ideas
including their magazines ‘Awake!’
and ‘The Watchtower’.
Those publications heavily pushed
the 1975 end-time prediction.
The year was derived using Biblical chronology
to calculate the date of the supposed first human
Adam at 4026 B.C.E.
then adding 6,000 years —the allotted time
for humanity’s existence.
According to the Governing Body, at the end-time
only members of Jehovah’s organisation would
qualify for eternal life.
The rest would be annihilated.
In 1969, Awake! Magazine told young people
they needed to face the fact they would never
grow old in the present system
and never fulfil any career
the world had to offer.
In the previous year, the Kingdom Ministry
publication urged members
to get into pioneering ministry for the organisation
telling them there were only
about 90 months left
before human existence was completed.
In 1974, the publication then applauded members
who had sold their homes
to devote themselves to pioneering
remarking that it was a fine way to spend
the short time remaining
before the wicked world’s end.
The armageddon prediction changed many lives.
Witnesses gave up opportunities
in education and business.
Insurance policies were cancelled.
Some put off having children.
What was the leadership doing?
Buying new property.
In the early part of 1975, humanity’s final year
the organisation bought the fifteen-story
Towers Hotel in Brooklyn.
While they were encouraging and praising
huge sacrifices among their flock
they were expanding their real estate.
When 1975 passed without incident,
the Governing Body went into denial.
In July 1976, they said Witnesses who’d
put off or neglected things
they otherwise would’ve cared for
had got it wrong.
It was their own fault for thinking Bible
chronology revealed a specific date.
So, to excuse its own blunders,
the Governing Body scapegoated
all the Witnesses who’d been
guided by its blunders.
It also altered evidence.
In the 1968 edition of its publication
‘The Truth That Leads to Eternal Life’
it quoted a prediction made in 1960
by former US Secretary of State Dean Acheson
that in fifteen years time —ie 1975 —
the world would be too dangerous to live in.
But in the revised 1981 edition
the specific timeframe of fifteen years
was conspicuously replaced with the word ‘soon’.
In recent years, the Governing Body’s come
under scrutiny for another cover-up
this time regarding child sexual abuse.
The hypocrisy of this cover-up is as brazen as it gets.
In a barrage of articles in Awake! Magazine
the Governing Body has repeatedly pointed
a sanctimonious finger at the Catholic church
for its institutional cover-up
of child molestation by its priests
noting the long-term, often permanent, damage
done to the child.
These articles cast the Governing Body
as a champion of children.
A 2011 article correctly reported that abuse
by priests was ignored
because of loyalty to the absolute authority
of the Catholic church.
It neglected to mention that loyalty to the
Jehovah’s Witness Governing Body
which exercises vastly greater control over
its flock
has had the same silencing effect.
A 1993 article accused the Catholic church
of compounding the initial sexual abuse
with a second more painful psychological abuse
—the abuse of failing to listen or take
accusations seriously
and only protecting abusers.
A 1990 article accused the Catholic Church
of hushing up cases
and taking no significant disciplinary action.
But people in glass watchtowers
really shouldn’t throw stones.
As I’ll be showing, the Jehovah’s Witness
organisation is also guilty on every count.
The problem of child abuse
isn’t exclusive to any group.
But it can become entrenched in groups that
put up obstacles to justice.
One obstacle the Jehovah’s Witness Governing
Body shares with the Catholic church
is its preening concern for reputation.
Valuing public image over the welfare
of their members
has led both organisations to focus their energies
on hiding their shame rather than tackling the abuse.
But the Jehovah’s Witness leadership has erected
other special obstacles.
Through a combination of maladaptive doctrines
it’s created an organisation that enables
molesters and exiles their prey.
One doctrine that protects molesters is something
called the ‘two witness’ rule.
Based on passages from Deuteronomy and 1 Timothy
the two-witness rule demands that
congregational leaders called ‘elders’
have to hear the testimony of at least
two witnesses to convict an abuser.
Obviously the private nature of child sexual abuse
renders this condition extremely improbable.
In the absence of two witnesses, a confession
is required from the abuser.
If no confession is made, the matter is considered
to be in the hands of Jehovah.
So all abusers have to do to enjoy a life
of carefree child molestation
is make sure they’re not seen
and decline to confess.
This astounding leniency in favour of the abuser
isn’t always evident with other offences.
‘Shepherd the Flock of God’
—a judicial guidebook for elders —
gives a hypothetical case in which a married man
is observed to stay overnight
at the house of his secretary
but denies committing adultery.
Despite the fact that there are
no witnesses to adultery
and no confession has been obtained
it’s claimed there’s strong enough
circumstantial evidence
of sexual impropriety to warrant judicial action
and even to allow the wife to divorce and remarry
which is a rare privilege among Jehovah’s Witnesses
who generally equate remarriage with adultery
based on Matthew 19, verse 9.
So, for adults, just seeing someone
go in and out of a house
is enough to establish adultery.
Meanwhile, abused children need
multiple witnesses or a confession.
Otherwise, case closed.
The Governing Body likes to project the image
of an organisation beyond reproach.
To maintain this illusion, congregations are instructed
to shun individuals regarded as troublesome,
including close relatives.
This is based on a line from 1 Corinthians:
‘remove the wicked man from among yourselves’.
This doctrine might seem perfect
for ridding the organisation of abusers.
Instead it repeatedly works to expel the abused.
There are two main paths to getting shunned.
The voluntary path is disassociation.
Here, the person quits the organisation
making a formal declaration of departure.
They’ll then be treated
as if they no longer exist.
The involuntary path is disfellowshipping.
Here, the organisation expels and shuns individuals
who are deemed unrepentantly guilty
of ‘wicked deeds’.
These include offences like theft and assault
but also extend to the following:
artificial insemination by donor, which is
equated with adultery;
celebrating Christmas or participating in
interfaith activities;
smoking or selling tobacco; professional boxing;
failure to abstain from blood transfusions;
and associating with disfellowshipped individuals.
Another offence is causing divisions
—which can be applied
to anyone who challenges or criticises
the Governing Body.
Disassociation and disfellowshipping
both favour the molester.
When their abusers’s guilt is left in Jehovah’s hands
children face the prospect of risking
ongoing retraumatisation
by remaining in congregations
that protect their abusers.
Inevitably, some children will feel
driven to disassociate.
For the abuser, there’s no incentive to disassociate.
So disassociation works in the abuser’s favour.
The threat of disfellowshipping
has been repeatedly used to silence allegations.
Washington resident Erica Garza initially
confided to her father about her sexual abuse
perpetrated by his best friend.
As an elder he’d been instructed
never to call the police.
But when the organisation took no action
Erica said she’d go to the police herself.
Her elders said if she did she’d be disfellowshipped
and condemned by Jehovah.
Despite this, she went ahead and her abuser was charged and convicted on four counts.
Erica and her supportive family were shunned.
Child safety advocates also get disfellowshipped
for speaking out.
Barbara Anderson was a Jehovah’s Witness
for 43 years.
In the 1990s, working as a researcher at the
Watchtower headquarters in New York
she found files containing hundreds of accusations
against male and female members
along with evidence that the organisation
had privately settled
numerous expensive abuse lawsuits.
After discussing these facts
in a 2002 ‘Dateline’ NBC news report
she was disfellowshipped.
She said she was later told thousands of members
had left the religion following the report
and that she’d been blamed for their annihilation
in the coming armageddon.
While abused children and their advocates
are threatened with disfellowshipping
merely for seeking the justice
their organisation fails to provide
for the shrewd abuser the threat
of disfellowshipping is non-existent.
In 2002, BBC’s Panorama reported the case
of Ian Cousins
who confessed to elders that he’d molested
one of his daughters.
Their response?
He was instructed to apologise, sent home with the daughter he molested
and the congregation was informed that he’d been reproved for an unspecified wrongdoing.
Incredibly, that was it.
This is the organisation
that accused the Catholic Church
of taking no significant disciplinary action.
Unsurprisingly, with no consequences to constrain him
Cousins continued molesting his daughter.
When she moved out to escape the abuse
he turned on his other daughter, Alison.
Like her sister, Alison said she informed
an elder of the abuse
but was accused of lying
even though they had access
to his previous confession of abuse.
Eventually she told the elders unless they
did something, she’d call the police.
In the following police investigation
Alison learned of her sister’s abuse and
her father’s confession.
The Panorama report noted:
‘When he confessed to congregation elders,
Cousins got a mild rebuke.’
‘When he confessed in court, he got five years in jail.’
In 2015, another abused individual explained
how the organisation rationalises its rejection
of secular authorities in abuse cases.
Testifying anonymously
to the Australian Royal Commission into
Institutional Responses to Child Sexual Abuse
she recounted being threatened with
disfellowshipping if she called the police
by an elder who quoted 1 Corinthians 6: verses 1-8
which forbids taking brothers to court.
The Commission heard evidence that the organisation
had kept records of 1,006 alleged abusers
in Australia since 1950
—none of them reported to police.
I’ll be exploring the Royal Commission’s
investigation in a future video.
Apparently this scriptural justification
doesn’t extend to all crime.
In 2016, a letter to the elders regarding
their ‘Kingdom Halls’
— their places of worship —
stated that theft and vandalism should be
promptly reported to the local authorities.
It explains: ‘When property damage occurs quick
action can go far in preventing further damage’.
Is that sentiment any less true
of damage to children?
Are children less important than property?
By its actions, the organisation reveals its true values.
Jehovah’s Witness literature repeatedly plays
on wolf and sheep imagery
comparing non-Witnesses and ex-Witnesses
to oppressive wicked wolves
intent on attacking a pure and vulnerable flock.
In reality, the doctrines
of the Jehovah’s Witness leadership
systematically protect the wolves
inside the organisation
while forcing the sheep out of the flock.
Is it plausible that a benevolent
super-intelligent divine being
would create such an glaringly flawed system?
Or does this ugly mess have distinctly
human fingerprints all over it?
It’s disorientating enough when survivors of child abuse
get shunned by an organisation
that claims to champion children.
But they’re hit by another curveball
when the organisation’s representatives
refuse to admit that it practices shunning.
Whether it’s in news interviews,
in door-to-door preaching
or in court hearings under divine oath
when the subject of shunning comes up
Witnesses repeatedly go into cover-up mode.
Suddenly this strictly enforced doctrine
gets misrepresented
as a matter of personal choice.
Some witnesses even play the prejudice card
complaining that the term shunning
evokes unwelcome stereotypes.
The organisation’s subterfuge regarding
shunning extends to its website —jw.org.
In its FAQ article ‘Do Jehovah’s Witnesses Shun
Former Members of Their Religion?’
it even dodges its own question.
The article says baptised Witnesses who’ve
drifted away
or no longer preach are not shunned.
This is a misleading example.
The organisation doesn’t classify these
individuals as former members.
They’re called ‘inactive’ members
—or ‘faders’.
To become former members they’d have to
disassociate or get disfellowshipped.
Then they would be shunned.
The article claims if a man’s disfellowshipped
and his wife and children are Jehovah’s
Witnesses
normal family affections and dealings continue.
This is another misleading example.
Relatives living in the same household are
considered a special case
in that the organisation allows
a degree of association.
What the article neglects to mention
is that if disfellowshipped family members
ever move out of the house
barring necessary family business,
they can be shunned like any stranger.
As the organisation comments with apparent relish:
if the disfellowshipped or disassociated one
is a relative living outside the immediate
family circle and home
it might be possible to have almost no contact
at all with the relative.
The truth is Witnesses are told to avoid
all normal contact with disfellowshipped relatives
— including text messages and emails —
and not to look for excuses
to associate with them.
Witnesses who maintain unnecessary association
with disfellowshipped relatives
can be disfellowshipped themselves.
How does an organisation
that claims to represent ‘the Truth’
justify its deliberate use of deception to
conceal the sexual abuse of children
and the doctrine of shunning to which many
of those abused children are then subjected?
Jehovah’s Witness literature
claims ‘all lying is bad’
and quotes Biblical passages denouncing lies
as detestable to Jehovah.
But like David Berg, the organisation gives
itself licence to deceive.
Just as Berg had his ‘deceivers yet true’ doctrine
the Jehovah’s Witness Governing Body has
its own version
called ‘theocratic war strategy’
or ‘theocratic warfare’.
Like Berg’s doctrine, it strictly forbids
lying to fellow members.
Like Berg’s doctrine, it denounces lying
for selfish motives.
And like Berg’s doctrine, it asserts that
non-members are not entitled to the truth.
Putting these two groups side by side highlights
the perversity of these doctrines.
Here we have two groups who would each accuse
the other of false teaching
but wouldn’t consider them entitled to know
the truth.
Both groups claim their own brand
of deception is fine
while the other group’s is wicked.
They’re mirror images
each accusing the other while exonerating themselves.
This is the absurdity that results from the hypocritical systems of supremacist groups
who judge others on standards
they themselves decline to follow.
The Governing Body of Jehovah’s Witnesses
claims deception is only used
to prevent harm or persecution.
But does covering up child sexual abuse qualify as preventing harm or persecution?
The problem becomes clear when we
bring back the Catholic Church.
If the Governing Body wants to defend its cover-up
on the grounds of preventing harm or persecution
it has to accept the same defence from the
Catholic Church over its cover-up.
More to the point, if it rejects that defence
from the Catholic Church
it has no defence itself.
Another hypocrisy regarding the Catholics
concerns the guilt trip
Jehovah’s Witness elders repeatedly use
to stop children
reporting their abuse to the authorities.
Children are told they’ll bring reproach
on Jehovah’s name.
But in its many criticisms regarding
Catholic child abuse
did the Governing Body reproach their god?
No. It reproached the church, the pope, the clergy
— the humans who allowed it.
Likewise, when cases of child abuse
by Jehovah’s Witnesses emerge
no one’s reproaching Jehovah.
They’re reproaching the organisation, the Governing Body, the elders —the humans who allow it.
Telling children they’ll bring reproach on Jehovah
isn’t just emotionally abusive.
It’s a lie.
The organisation’s cover-up regarding shunning also fails to qualify as preventing harm or persecution.
It does put the organisation in a very unattractive light.
But it’s an accurate light.
The abusive nature of shunning
is something the organisation itself
unwittingly acknowledged
in a 2013 Awake! article about the silent treatment.
It noted with disapproval how some people
use the silent treatment
to punish or to manipulate others into compliance.
It even asked readers if that was really how
they want to treat people they love.
That question can be thrown right back at
the Governing Body in regards to shunning.
The Jehovah’s Witness organisation
is a group wrestling with huge internal contradictions
wanting to project a pure, morally clean image
to an outside world it despises
and in the process, neglecting and abusing
its own members
in the most callous, heartless ways.
The Biblical passage Matthew 7:16, says:
‘By their fruits you will recognise them.’
The Jehovah’s Witness leadership claims
that its organisation’s authenticity
can be recognised by its fruits.
It asserts that any religion
unable to unite its devotees
cannot have the key for uniting humankind.
And it claims that the fruits of peace and harmony
found within its organisation
is proof that it has that key.
Any group that routinely expels
individuals who criticise or challenge it
will eventually be left with a pool of uncritical, compliant followers.
That isn’t the same as ‘uniting your devotees’.
To unite means to bring together
—to eradicate divisions.
Eradicating people, as the Jehovah’s Witness
organisation does
only proves its inability to unite them.
Silence does not imply peace and harmony.
Silence can be pregnant with anguish.
For children whose desperate reports of abuse
are repeatedly dismissed as lies
and who are threatened with expulsion
for the sin of tainting their religion’s
false image of pureness
there is no peace or harmony.
David Berg and the Jehovah’s Witness leadership
had opposing views on sex with children.
But both groups became a sanctuary for molesters.
In Berg’s case, his doctrines
actively condoned abuse.
In the case of the Jehovah’s Witness leadership,
even though it denounces abuse
its maladaptive doctrines work to perpetuate it
by silencing abused individuals
and their advocates
and teaching smart abusers that by simply
uttering an apology
they can avoid all consequences
and continue their molesting.
In any healthy group, dangerously flawed procedures
are acknowledged and urgently corrected.
But in groups that claim timeless divine authority
flaws are preserved in the formaldehyde of faith.
Many individuals abused in dogmatic groups
like Berg’s Family and the
Jehovah’s Witness organisation
have been amazed at the warmth, care and support
they’ve received from the outside world
— a world whose inhabitants they’d been
taught to demonise.
It’s an eye-opening contrast to the cold,
defensive, often accusing treatment
they received in their former group.
By their fruits, we will recognise
the true natures of groups.
The genuinely benevolent ones
won’t be found concealing abuse.